Blog: introduction to bpfd (#650)
bpfd-dev/bpfd: docs/blog/posts/introduction-to-bpfd.md

---
date: 2023-07-16
authors:
  - anfredette
  - shaneutt
---

# Introduction To Bpfd

In today's cloud ecosystem there's a high demand for low-level system access
to enable high performance observability, security and networking functionality
for applications. Historically a great deal of this kind of functionality has
been implemented in [userspace], but the ability to program these kinds of
things directly into the operating system can provide many benefits including
(but not limited to) performance. However, it has historically been very
challenging to add functionality directly to the operating system. In the past
you may have ended up developing and managing cumbersome [kernel modules][kmod],
but in recent years [eBPF] has emerged as a technology in the
[Linux Kernel][linux] looking to change all that.

> 

Reviewer: Add:

`<!-- more -->`

This will render the first paragraph as the excerpt and render the Continue Reading button after it.

Reviewer 2: Done.

---
date: 2023-07-16
authors:
  - anfredette
  - shaneutt
---

> # Introduction To bpfd

Reviewer 3: I guess this is the title right, I think we can make it a bit more catchy 😉 

```suggestion
# bpfd: a novel way to mange eBPF
```
or something along those lines

at runtime, with safety and performance provided by the kernel itself using a
Just-In-Time (JIT) compiler and verification process. There are a wide variety
of types of programs one can create with eBPF, which include everything from
networking applications to security systems.

We are however still fairly early in the eBPF journey and it's not all kittens
and rainbows: the process of developing, testing, deploying, and maintaining
eBPF programs is not a road well traveled yet, and the story gets even more
complicated when you want to deploy your programs into more complicated setups,
such as a [Kubernetes] cluster. It was these kinds of problems that
motivated the creation of [bpfd]: a system daemon for loading and managing eBPF
programs in both traditional systems and Kubernetes clusters. In this blog post,
we'll discuss the problems bpfd can help solve, and how to deploy and use it.

[userspace]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_space_and_kernel_space
[kmod]:https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Kernel_module
[eBPF]:https://ebpf.io
[linux]:https://kernel.org
[Kubernetes]:https://kubernetes.io
[bpfd]:https://bpfd.dev

> ## Challenges with developing and deploying eBPF programs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Current Challenges with eBPF development
```

with your programs reported by the [eBPF verifier] can be a very slow process at
best, and a hard impediment for progress at worst due to its recondite nature.

Beyond the fundamentals of developing and loading programs locally to test them,
once you have working code the process of deploying these in testing and
staging environments to validate them often ends up resulting in a lot of
custom program loading and management functionality specific to the application.
Not to mention eventually moving to production systems, potentially in
environments like Kubernetes clusters: the operational considerations continue to
compound.

Security is another significant challenge, which we will cover in more depth in
a follow-on blog.  However, at a high level, applications that use eBPF
typically load their own eBPF programs, which requires at least CAP_BPF.  Many
BPF programs and attach points require additional capabilities from
CAP_SYS_PTRACE, CAP_NET_ADMIN and even including CAP_SYS_ADMIN.  These
privileges include capabilities that aren’t strictly necessary for eBPF and are
too coarsely grained to be useful.  Since the pods that load eBPF are mostly

> long-lived and often don’t drop privileges it leaves a wide attack surface.

Reviewer 3: So let's be careful about the "context" we're talking about bpf in here, because doesn't the same thing apply to a bpf loading process on a single node as well? 

"Since the pods...."

Makes me feel like we jumped from talking about the challenges of eBPF in general to talking about the challenges of eBPF in Kubernetes.  Having a clear and explicit separation between the two will help with this. 

In this specific case I think we can just say "Since the processes which load ebpf are usually long-lived and often...."

> While it doesn't solve all the ergonomic and maintenance problems associated
> with adopting eBPF, [bpfd] does try to address several of these issues,
> particularly when it comes to security, and deploying and managing the lifecycle
> of your eBPF programs. In the coming sections, we will go into more depth about

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While it doesn't solve all the ergonomic and maintenance problems associated
with adopting eBPF, [bpfd] does try to address several of these issues,
particularly when as it pertains to security, and lifecycle management
of eBPF programs. In the coming sections, we will go into more depth about
```

what eBPF does (and does NOT) do, and how it can help reduce the costs
associated with deploying and managing eBPF-powered workloads.

[eBPF verifier]:https://docs.kernel.org/bpf/verifier.html
[bpfd]:https://bpfd.dev

## bpfd Overview

> The bpfd project provides a software stack that aims to make it easy to manage

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The bpfd project provides a software stack that makes it easy to manage
```

the full lifecycle of eBPF programs.  In particular, it can load, unload,
modify, and monitor eBPF programs on a single host, or across a full Kubernetes

> cluster. The key components of the bpfd solution include the bpfd daemon, and
> Kubernetes support composed of eBPF CRDs, a bpfd agent, and a bpfd operator that
> manages the installation and lifecycle of the bpfd agent and CRDs in a
> Kubernetes cluster. bpfd can be used independently on an individual Linux

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
cluster. The key components of bpfd  include the bpfd daemon itself which can run independently on any linux box, and an accompanying Kubernetes Operator designed to bring first class support to clusters via Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs).  
```

And then you can get rid of the last sentence.

system, or with Kubernetes to manage eBPF programs across the entire cluster.

These components will be covered in more detail in the following sections.

> ### bpfd Daemon

Reviewer 3: I think it might be a good idea to have a section here like 

### eBPF program packaging

Which goes into how, utilizing CORE, we can package and containerize a eBPF program into an OCI container image ..... blah blah blah as I feel like it's a key part of our story for both a single node and in a K8s cluster.

Reviewer 2: I put one after the daemon and k8s sections.

The bpfd daemon works directly with the operating system to manage eBPF

> programs.  It loads, updates, and unloads eBPF programs, pins maps, and provides
> visibility into the eBPF programs loaded on a system.  As of the writing of this
> blog, bpfd fully supports XDP, TC, Tracepoint, uProbe, and kProbe eBPF programs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
programs.  It loads, updates, and unloads eBPF programs, pins maps, and provides
visibility into the kernel's eBPF subsystem.  Currently, bpfd fully supports XDP, TC, Tracepoint, uProbe, and kProbe eBPF programs.
```

In addition, bpfd can display information about all types of eBPF programs
loaded on a system whether they were loaded by bpfd or some other mechanism.
bpfd is developed in the Rust programming language and uses [Aya], an eBPF

> library which is also developed in Rust.

Reviewer 3: Can we add a quick note here on WHY it was developed in rust?

Reviewer 2: I guess it's for all the reasons that people say rust is good.  However, in the spirit of not making this longer than it already is, I'm inclined to leave that out.

When used on an individual server, bpfd runs as a system daemon, and

> applications communicate with bpfd using a gRPC API.  bpfd can also be used via

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
applications communicate with it using a gRPC API.  bpfd can also be used via
```

a command line tool called bpfctl which in turn uses the gRPC API. 

    bpfctl load-from-image -g GLOBAL_u8=01 -i quay.io/bpfd-bytecode/xdp_pass:latest xdp -i bpfd-host -p 100

This architecture is depicted in the following diagram.

![bpfd Architecture](./img/bpfd_architecture.jpg)

Using bpfd in this manner significantly improves security because the API is
secured using mTLS, and only bpfd needs the privileges required to load and manage
eBPF programs and maps.

Writing eBPF code is tough enough as it is.  Typically, an eBPF-based
application would need to also implement support for the lifecycle management of
the required eBPF programs.  bpfd does that for you and allows you to focus on
developing your application.

> Another key functional advantage that bpfd offers over libbpf or the Cilium
> ebpf-go library is support for multiple XDP programs on a single attach point.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another key functional advantage that bpfd offers over applications which manually use an eBPF library like libbpf or the Cilium
ebpf-go library is support for multiple XDP programs on a single attach point.
```

Reviewer 2: I tweaked it a bit.

Standard XDP only supports a single XDP program on a given attach point.
However, bpfd supports loading multiple XDP programs on a single attach point
using the [multi-prog] protocol defined in libxdp.  This allows the user to add,
delete, update, prioritize, and re-prioritize the multiple programs on each

> attach point.  There is also support to configure whether the flow of execution

Reviewer 3: nit/ attach point -> interface

should return or continue to the next program in the list based on the return
value. 

While TC natively supports multiple programs on each attach point, it lacks the
controls and flexibility enabled by the multi-prog protocol. bpfd therefore also
supports the same XDP multi-prog solution for TC programs which has the added
benefit of a consistent user experience for both XDP and TC programs.

eBPF programs are also difficult to debug on a system.  The visibility provided
by bpfd can be a key tool in understanding what is deployed and how they may
interact.

[Aya]:https://aya-rs.dev/
[multi-prog]:https://github.com/xdp-project/xdp-tools/blob/master/lib/libxdp/protocol.org

### bpfd Kubernetes Support

The benefits of bpfd are brought to Kubernetes by the bpfd operator.  The bpfd

> operator is developed in Go and is based on the Written in Go using the Operator SDK

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
operator is developed in Go using the Operator SDK
```

Reviewer 2: not sure what happened there :-)

framework, so it should be familiar to most Kubernetes application developers.

> The bpfd operator deploys a bpfd-agent pod, containing both bpfd and the bpfd
> agent on each node.  Rather than making requests directly to bpfd with the gRPC

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The bpfd operator deploys a daemonset, containing both the bpfd and bpfd
agent processes.  Rather than making requests directly to bpfd with the gRPC
```

API or bpfctl as described above, Kubernetes applications use bpfd custom
resource definitions (CRDs) to make requests to bpfd to load and attach eBPF
programs.  bpfd uses two types of CRDs; Program CRDs for each eBPF program type
(referred to as *Program CRDs, where * = Xdp, Tc, etc.) created by the
application to express the desired state of an eBPF program on the cluster, and

> BpfProgram CRDs created by the bpfd agent to report the current state of the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
per node BpfProgram CRDs created by the bpfd agent to report the current state of the
```

> eBPF program on each node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
programs on each node.
```

```bash
kubectl get bpfprograms.bpfd.dev xdp-pass-all-nodes-bpfd-deployment-control-plane-eth0 -o yaml
```

```yaml
apiVersion: bpfd.dev/v1alpha1
kind: BpfProgram
metadata:
  annotations:
    bpfd.dev.xdpprogramcontroller/interface: eth0
  creationTimestamp: "2023-08-29T22:08:12Z"
  finalizers:
  - bpfd.dev.xdpprogramcontroller/finalizer
  generation: 1
  labels:
    bpfd.dev/ownedByProgram: xdp-pass-all-nodes
    kubernetes.io/hostname: bpfd-deployment-control-plane
  name: xdp-pass-all-nodes-bpfd-deployment-control-plane-eth0
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: bpfd.dev/v1alpha1
    blockOwnerDeletion: true
    controller: true
    kind: XdpProgram
    name: xdp-pass-all-nodes
    uid: 838dc2f8-a348-427e-9dc4-f6a6ea621930
  resourceVersion: "2690"
  uid: 5a622961-e5b0-44fe-98af-30756b2d0b62
spec:
  type: xdp
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-08-29T22:08:14Z"
    message: Successfully loaded bpfProgram
    reason: bpfdLoaded
    status: "True"
    type: Loaded
```

Finally, the bpfd operator watches for updates to the BpfProgram objects and
reports the global state of each eBPF program.  If the program was successfully

> loaded everywhere requested, it will report success, otherwise, it will identify

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
loaded on every selected node, it will report success, otherwise, it will identify
```

  creationTimestamp: "2023-08-29T22:08:12Z"
  finalizers:
  - bpfd.dev.operator/finalizer
  generation: 2
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: xdpprogram
  name: xdp-pass-all-nodes
  resourceVersion: "2685"
  uid: 838dc2f8-a348-427e-9dc4-f6a6ea621930
spec:
  bytecode:
    image:
      imagepullpolicy: IfNotPresent
      url: quay.io/bpfd-bytecode/xdp_pass:latest
  globaldata:
    GLOBAL_u8: AQ==
  interfaceselector:
    primarynodeinterface: true
  mapownerselector: {}
  nodeselector: {}
  priority: 0
  proceedon:
  - pass
  - dispatcher_return
  sectionname: pass
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-08-29T22:08:12Z"
    message: Waiting for Program Object to be reconciled to all nodes
    reason: ProgramsNotYetLoaded
    status: "True"
    type: NotYetLoaded
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-08-29T22:08:12Z"
    message: bpfProgramReconciliation Succeeded on all nodes
    reason: ReconcileSuccess
    status: "True"
    type: ReconcileSuccess
```
More details about this process can be seen
[here](https://bpfd.dev/getting-started/example-bpf-k8s/)

> ### Key benefits of bpfd

Reviewer 3: I had already basically gleamed this key-benefits section from the above sections.  IMO this is getting long and we should leave this out.  Then we can have shorter follow up blogs on 
- How bpfd can help security
- How bpfd can help vis and debug
- etc etc

Reviewer 2: We've heard this stuff a hundred times, so we get it.  However, I think it's useful to explicitly call out and summarize the benefits.  We can still have follow-up blogs on each issue with more details and examples.

Kernel][Linux] looking to change all that.

<!-- more -->

eBPF is a simple and efficient way to dynamically load programs into the kernel
at runtime, with safety and performance provided by the kernel itself using a
Just-In-Time (JIT) compiler and verification process. There are a wide variety
of program types one can create with eBPF, which include everything from
networking applications to security systems.

However, eBPF is still a fairly nascent technology and it's not all kittens and
rainbows. The process of developing, testing, deploying, and maintaining eBPF
programs is not a road well traveled yet, and the story gets even more
complicated when you want to deploy your programs in a multi-node system, such
as a [Kubernetes] cluster. It was these kinds of problems that motivated the
creation of [bpfd], a system daemon for loading and managing eBPF programs in
both traditional systems and Kubernetes clusters. In this blog post, we'll
discuss the problems bpfd can help solve, and how to deploy and use it.

[user space]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_space_and_kernel_space
[kmod]:https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Kernel_module

> [eBPF]:https://ebpf.io

Reviewer 4: Should eBPF just link to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EBPF?

Author: I think that's fine. https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/bpf/index.html would be fine too, but maybe for the target audience wikipedia is better.

Reviewer 2: I changed it to Wikipedia.

(CRDs) to make requests to bpfd to load and attach eBPF programs.  bpfd uses two
types of CRDs; Program CRDs for each eBPF program type (referred to as *Program
CRDs, where * = Xdp, Tc, etc.) created by the application to express the desired
state of an eBPF program on the cluster, and per node BpfProgram CRDs created by
the bpfd agent to report the current state of the eBPF program on each node.

Using XDP as an example, the application can request that an XDP program be
loaded on multiple nodes using the XdpProgram CRD, which includes the necessary
information such as the bytecode image to load, interface to attach it to, and
priority.  An XdpProgram CRD that would do the same thing as the bpfctl command
shown above on every node in a cluster is shown below.

```yaml
apiVersion: bpfd.dev/v1alpha1
kind: XdpProgram
metadata:
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: xdpprogram
  name: xdp-pass-all-nodes
spec:
  sectionname: pass
  # Select all nodes
  nodeselector: {}
  interfaceselector:
    primarynodeinterface: true
  priority: 0
  bytecode:
    image:
      url: quay.io/bpfd-bytecode/xdp_pass:latest
  globaldata:
    GLOBAL_u8:
      - 0x01
```

> The bpfd agent on each node watches for the *Program CRDs, and makes calls to

Reviewer 4: The `*Program`, the * is interpreted as italics until the next * in this paragraph. Not sure why it didn't do it above, but need to figure out how to escape it.

Reviewer 2: I think I fixed it.  We'll see how it renders on netlify.

loaded on every selected node, it will report success, otherwise, it will identify
the node(s) that had a problem.  The following is the XdpProgram CRD as updated
by the operator.

```bash
kubectl get xdpprograms.bpfd.dev xdp-pass-all-nodes -o yaml
```

```yaml
apiVersion: bpfd.dev/v1alpha1
kind: XdpProgram
metadata:
  annotations:
    kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration: |
      {"apiVersion":"bpfd.dev/v1alpha1","kind":"XdpProgram","metadata":{"annotations":{},"labels":{"app.kubernetes.io/name":"xdpprogram"},"name":"xdp-pass-all-nodes"},"spec":{"bytecode":{"image":{"url":"quay.io/bpfd-bytecode/xdp_pass:latest"}},"globaldata":{"GLOBAL_u8":[1]},"interfaceselector":{"primarynodeinterface":true},"nodeselector":{},"priority":0,"sectionname":"pass"}}
  creationTimestamp: "2023-08-29T22:08:12Z"
  finalizers:
  - bpfd.dev.operator/finalizer
  generation: 2
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: xdpprogram
  name: xdp-pass-all-nodes
  resourceVersion: "2685"
  uid: 838dc2f8-a348-427e-9dc4-f6a6ea621930
spec:
  bytecode:
    image:
      imagepullpolicy: IfNotPresent
      url: quay.io/bpfd-bytecode/xdp_pass:latest
  globaldata:

>     GLOBAL_u8: AQ==

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    GLOBAL_u8: 0x01
```

go-xdp-counter-example   stats         {}             55         {"primarynodeinterface":true}   ["pass","dispatcher_return"]
```

8\. Confirm that the counter program is counting packets.

Notes:

- The counters are updated every 5 seconds, and stats are being collected
for the pod's primary node interface, which may not have a lot of traffic.
However, running the `kubectl` command below generates traffic on that
interface, so run the command a few times and give it a few seconds in between
to confirm whether the counters are incrementing. 
- Replace "go-xdp-counter-ds-9lpgp" with the go-xdp-counter pod name for
your deployment.

```bash
kubectl logs go-xdp-counter-ds-9lpgp -n go-xdp-counter | tail
```

```bash
2023/09/05 16:58:21 1204 packets received
2023/09/05 16:58:21 13741238 bytes received

2023/09/05 16:58:24 1220 packets received
2023/09/05 16:58:24 13744258 bytes received

2023/09/05 16:58:27 1253 packets received
2023/09/05 16:58:27 13750364 bytes received
```

9\. Deploy the `xdp-pass-all-nodes` program with `priority` set to 50 and
  `proceedon` set to `drop` as shown below

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF

> ```

Reviewer 4: In this sample you put a space between the `kubectl apply` command and the associated yaml, but in the followup sample you do not. I think I like the second output, but they should be consistent.

Reviewer 2: I'll change it.  I was trying to see if it formatted the yaml block differently, but it didn't.  I'll make it like the next one.
